>> Is there a hidden,
more esoteric,
deeper meaning to the Hollywood
films that we all love
to watch?
I'm Jay Dyer.
>> And I'm Jay Weidner, and
this is "Hollywood Decoded."
[THEME MUSIC]
>> "Eyes Wide Shut" is
Stanley Kubrick's adaptation
of the 1926 novel by Arthur
Schnitzler, "Traumnovelle,"
which deals with surrealism,
once again, Freudian imagery,
the occult, psychoanalysis.
That's what we're
going to look at today.
>> Dr. Bill Harford, played
by Tom Cruise, and his wife,
Alice, played by Nicole
Kidman, have come to a large,
elite party for Christmas.
>> Victor, hello.
>> Bill and Alice, Bill,
Alice, merry Christmas.
>> Merry Christmas.
>> You look lovely.
>> How good to see both of you.
Thanks so much for coming.
>> We wouldn't have
missed it for the world.
>> Great to see you.
>> Alice, look at you.
God, you're absolutely stunning.
>> Oh.
Why do you think Ziegler invites
us to these things every year?
>> This is what you get
for making house calls.
>> So when they're dancing in
that scene, Tom looks away,
and he sees the piano player.
>> Nick, right?
>> Nick Nightingale.
Well, Nick is an old
friend of his from college.
And Nick's, you know,
kind of a loser,
was going to be a doctor,
now he's a jazz musician.
And I'd like to point out that
in alchemy, the bird that sings
at night is the nightingale.
And Nick Nightingale
is definitely
going to sing at night when
he's pursued by the bad guys.
>> And so he's the one that
reveals that he's the guy that
told Tom about the party.
>> Which I believe
was done by design,
these clues are being
left there, you know,
where he leaves the napkin
that says "fidelio."
This was at the behest
of the cult, ultimately.
>> Yeah, they were testing
to see if Tom had the stuff.
Now Nicole already
had the stuff.
But does her husband, who's
5 inches shorter than her,
does he have the stuff?
>> Right, so here we have a
guy who thinks he's at the top
of the totem pole, Bill Harford.
He's an elite New York doctor.
He's upper, upper middle class,
maybe even lower upper class.
And for him, this is the
apex of his existence.
He's married to a beautiful
woman who's an artist.
But what Bill's
going to discover
is that his whole world is
not what he thinks it is.
And this is a common
theme in surrealism.
But the reason that I chose
that clip was because you'll
notice in the
background-- and you
know this-- that Kubrick
was a stickler for symbology
and background images.
And you see these stars
placed very prominently.
And they appear to be
eight-sided stars, stars
of Ishtar.
So I think we're
looking at something
that is immediately occultic.
There's something
in the background,
and this party is
actually going to be
the weeding-out process
for what R. Kelly calls
the (SINGING) afterparty.
And this after party is going
to be a party like none other,
actually.
But there has to be a
kind of test or temptation
that takes place, or
process of weeding out,
to see if Bill and
Alice are actually
worthy of this party,
which we find out
is actually going to
be a sex magic cult.
So Bill is going to be tempted
by two women, both of whom
are British and talk
in terms of nobility.
They mentioned being a Windsor,
one of them, Nuala Windsor.
And then Alice is going to be
tempted by this Hungarian suave
guy who starts quoting Ovid
about cheating on your spouse.
And his name, curiously,
is Sandor Szavost,
kind of close to Anton
Szandor LaVey, maybe.
>> Yeah, and those
eight-pointed stars,
when Sandor is dancing with
Nicole Kidman and trying
to seduce her by suggesting they
go up and see the more private
art collection upstairs--
>> I'm married.
>> --Kubrick has those
eight-pointed stars constantly
behind them.
And what's interesting is as
he goes through his seduction,
at the very end when
he fails to seduce her,
at least temporarily,
I think, she never
is ever in alignment
with those eight stars.
She's always just off alignment.
But when she finally puts
her left hand forward, says,
I'm married, and
shows him the ring,
then immediately the stars
form perfect around her head,
as if she's done something
which exalts her.
And I'd like to
point out, of course,
also that in the after party,
the orgy that we'll see later,
there's only 11
women in the circle.
There should be 12 if
it's a proper coven,
with the 13th in the center.
So there is a woman missing.
And I can't help but believe,
as we go through our examination
here, that we're both not
going to agree at the end
that maybe, possibly Alice
actually attended this party.
>> That's what I've thought.
And that's what I put in the
book, is that my theory is
that Alice is or possibly has
been brought up in this cult.
This is part of her reality.
And she will actually leave
clues throughout the film
that she knows what Bill's
up to and what's going on.
And the whole
process of the film
is Bill being led towards
this big revelation.
>> That's exactly right.
And we'll see as we go on
here that Alice is a lot more
guilty than we think.
>> Exactly, so the next clip
we're going to look at is under
the rainbow.
Two important things in
this sequence, first of all,
the under the rainbow
is very curious
because this evokes
"Wizard of Oz."
>> What is it?
>> Just like with
"Alice in Wonderland,"
Nicole's name is
Alice in this film.
Here we have under the rainbow.
This is conscious, I would
say, mind-control imagery.
And if you doubt that,
consider the fact
that this is about human
trafficking in this scene.
[MURMURING]
>> What on Earth
is going on here?
>> Oh, Milich, I can
explain everything.
>> You fucking
idiot, I'll kill you.
I promise, I'll kill you.
And you, have you
no sense of decency?
Gentlemen, have you
>> Milich, have you gone crazy?
We were invited here
by the young lady.
>> Young lady?
This is my daughter.
And couldn't you
see she's a child?
You will have to
explain to police.
>> To the police?
>> You have Leelee
Sobieski playing this girl
who's obviously being trafficked
by the Milich character.
This is all a setup, right?
This is to cause Bill
Harford to go to the party.
>> The young lady
invited us here.
>> Couldn't you see
she is deranged?
>> Doctor, I am sorry
to keep you waiting.
Gentlemen, this is
now a police matter.
You will please stay
here until I return.
>> Don't do this to me.
Let us out of here.
>> I am afraid that's
out of the question.
Doctor, um, sorry.
What color did you say?
>> Uh--
>> Black?
>> Black.
>> Gentlemen, please, have
the goodness to be quiet
for the moment.
Couldn't you see I'm trying
to serve my customer.
Sorry.
And you, little whore, go to bed
at once, you depraved creature.
I'll deal with you as soon
as I serve this gentleman.
>> You need an ermine cloak.
>> And unless you
turn on the captions,
or you read the screenplay,
you don't know that what she
whispers is "you need
an ermine cloak."
An ermine cloak is what the
nobility in Europe have worn.
So she's telling him,
you're going to this party.
We all know what's
happening here.
You're going to need
the right cloak.
So that shows that this has all
been a setup to get him there.
>> The whole scene is a
very strange setup for Tom,
the Cruise character,
to get to the party,
which is where the
real action starts.
>> So what we want to look at
next is the idea of secrecy
within cults.
You know, if we think about
"Mulholland Drive," we
had at the end-- there
was this hush, right.
The sign of Harpocrates,
it's called.
And this is the ancient
hermetic tradition
that you can't reveal
the secrets of the cult.
And that's exactly
what's going on here,
is that we've seen a
series of tests for Bill.
Bill is now going to have to
display some sign of secrecy,
because he's already
seen too much.
So let's look at the mask
and the oath of secrecy.
>> I believe in certain Masonic
groups, in Crowley's group,
this is a sign of
secrecy that you take,
the hand over the breast.
And it's the idea
that you're not going
to reveal what you've seen.
You've seen too much.
What's really traumatizing
for this scene
is that Bill is now considering
that maybe Alice knows it all.
She knows that he's been there.
Why else does he
have this, you know,
Renaissance mask that he's got?
So he's been doing something
that she doesn't know about.
When she explains her dream,
which has this Eden imagery,
she mentions it's like Eden.
She was nude.
And then it turns into
this orgy where she
has slept with all these men.
It freaks him out.
[SOBBING]
She's almost playing this
kind of psyops mind game
with him to basically
break him down.
And that's what the cult has
been doing the whole film,
is leading him along, leaving
breadcrumbs, breaking him down,
and ensuring ultimately that
he's going to be obedient.
>> Kubrick leaves it up
to the viewer to decide.
Did Nicole put that mask
there, or did someone
break into their apartment
and leave the mask there?
Either way, it's terrifying,
because either it
means your wife's
involved, or it
means that you're
being watched so
heavily that if
you say anything,
they're going to kill you.
The other thing
that's interesting
is we don't really understand
what happened to the mask
at the orgy.
He takes it off, and
it seems to disappear.
At that point, we
don't quite understand
if they took it from him,
or he lost it, or what.
But he does lose the mask.
So we don't know
what happened there.
It's another one of those
odd bits of continuity.
>> They could have broken
in and left it there.
>> They could have.
There are continuity problems
with this movie that I've never
seen in any Kubrick film.
>> The city doesn't make sense,
in terms of its geography.
>> The city does not make sense.
It does not look like New York.
So everything in this
movie is like a--
>> It's almost a dream state.
>> --a dream state.
It's almost like a dream.
>> And it's very novel.
>> Yeah, there are these strange
continuity errors that are
running all through the film,
which Kubrick was more or less
known to be a continuity freak.
>> Yeah, he would
never allow that.
>> No, he would take Polaroid
pictures to make sure
everything was exactly the same.
Somebody may have
budged something
when they went to
lunch or something.
Or he would purposely screw
with your continuity and reverse
things, like he was consciously
doing in The Shining, where you
were looking down a hallway.
And then the next cut, you're
looking the opposite way,
but everybody is still
in the same direction,
which was very odd.
So he's doing these.
But these continuity errors
don't make a lot of sense.
>> There are conscious
alterations that make us
wonder, is this a wake state?
Is it a dream state?
We don't know, which is
fitting because this is
another film about initiation.
It's about Bill
Harford being brought
through this process of seeing
how the world really works.
>> And he ultimately fails.
He does not get into the
secret society, which
is what the ending is all
about, with them at the Macy's
department store.
It's really Nicole
kind of consoling him.
Oh, well, you didn't make it.
Big deal, we'll try
again some other time.
And also we need to address the
entire sequences pre-orgy where
Tom is going through
one female character
after another who's
trying to seduce him,
always failing in some way.
And it's very interesting
because as soon as Nicole
brings up the fact that
she has this fantasy
about this naval
officer, suddenly
Tom's world, Bill Harford's
world, is shattered,
completely shattered.
And he goes out seeking,
like she was seeking, sex.
But he never, ever achieves it.
>> And I thought
if he wanted me,
even if it was
only for one night,
I was ready to
give up everything.
>> Bill Harford is confronted
with a level of wealth
and power that he
couldn't even conceive of.
And that's what this cult has.
This cult also has
at its disposal
all of the apparatchiks
of an intelligence agency.
I mean, they're
able to surveil him.
They can control what's in the
news, the story that comes out
about the beauty queen who
ransoms herself, right?
So they're very powerful.
And what I think is
the takeaway here
is that Bill Harford is not
at the top of the totem pole.
There are people above him.
And one of the ways I think that
we know that Alice is involved
is when Bill comes home
from his experience,
and she is sitting there
teaching the daughter
about mathematics.
And she says, two plus
two, blah, blah, blah.
If somebody has
$4, it equals $5.
This guy has a lot
more money than you.
And she looks over
at Bill, saying,
he's got a lot more
money than you.
So in other words,
you're dealing
with people who are
billionaires, trillionaires.
They've got a lot
more money than you.
You're out of your league.
You're out of your
element, Donny.
>> You're just a doctor.
>> Exactly, so in
the next scene,
we're going to see this promise
being made that is after all
of the traumatic experiences.
And all of this has
gone down, and they're
trying to cope with
and really figure out
how to handle what they've seen
and what they've agreed to.
So Bill is struggling
with the moral quandary
of cheating on his
wife, which he's not
successful in doing throughout
the beginning of the film.
And then he comes in contact
with this sex magic cult
that has no taboos whatsoever.
They're willing to engage
in murder, orgies, whatever.
And so I think that
throughout the film,
we've seen a lot of
symbology related to masks.
If you noticed at Domino, the
hooker who tries to seduce him,
she has all these
masks on her wall.
And she's got books on
Freud and sociology,
which is a little
curious for a hooker.
I'm guessing that Domino was
one of the girls at the orgy
as well who was leading
Bill down this path,
because when he goes
back, Domino is gone.
She's disappeared.
So she's played her role,
as she was supposed to.
So the promise has been made.
And now we're going
to look at this scene
where he's caught in the
midst of the occult ritual.
And it is an occult ritual.
In fact, they use a specifically
Romanian orthodox chant
put in reverse.
>> Catholic mass.
>> Right, and it's
intentionally reversed,
which is that principle
of inversion, black magic,
and so forth.
So we know that it is a sex
ritual cult. It's a dark cult.
Next we want to see that
clip where Bill gets caught.
>> What-- what is gonna
happen to that woman?
>> No one can
change her fate now.
When a promise has been made
here, there is no turning back.
Go.
>> Interesting that the
hierophant of this cult has
a British accent.
And we know that
the ermine cloak
was mentioned by Leelee
Sobieski's character
because that's
European nobility.
So I wonder if,
because Kubrick was
familiar with the British
upper establishment, the Royal
Society and so forth,
if he wasn't kind
of transmitting the idea that
maybe this power-playing cult
level of people
is at that level.
>> That's interesting
you say that,
because the actor who voiced
that character would play Lord
Bullington in "Barry Lyndon,"
the upper-crust family.
And, of course, Barry Lyndon,
played by Ryan O'Neal,
is trying to kind of break
through and get into.
And he destroys Barry
Lyndon in the movie.
I think Kubrick
consciously did that,
chose a very upper-crust
accent which the actor has,
and a very interesting scene.
>> Well, Kubrick has no problem
showing that the establishment
is willing to
traffick in humans.
I mean, this happens
in "Barry Lyndon."
You have this notion
of illicit sexuality
with underage people, minors.
This is what's happening with
the Leelee Sobieski character
referenced here in this film.
"Lolita," right?
I mean, Kubrick doesn't have
a problem talking about it.
And we even get that maybe
Danny in "The Shining"
might have been molested.
>> Well, the whole scene
with him on the bed with Jack
Nicholson, where he's saying, I
promise I will never hurt you,
Danny.
I mean, that's the
creepiest scene.
>> Is Kubrick saying
too much with this?
>> Well, he is.
And, again, I think
he's pointing out here
that this group is
not only all powerful.
But, again, what
happened to the mask?
He loses his mask.
When he returns the
costume later to Milich,
he doesn't have the mask.
But he should have
the mask in his hand
because he took it off.
And it should be right
there in his hand,
so it's very mysterious.
Maybe taking the mask
was part of the ritual
and then used to
scare him later.
Once you understand
the manipulation going
on in this film and how
Tom is like a football
in a giant game, then I think
the mystery kind of evaporates.
>> What we saw at the estate was
this magic circle, so to speak.
And what we're going
to look at next
is how it comes
up back at the end
of the film towards
the close, where
they're walking around the
department store at Christmas.
And consciously, Kubrick shows
this game, The Magic Circle.
And you see
pentagrams everywhere.
So let's look at that.
So now he's come in contact
with the magic circle.
I think we both probably
agree that Alice
is part of this circle.
She's part of this coven, right?
So now they've got
to deal with this.
How are they going
to deal with it?
>> That's nice.
>> I could put Sabrina in here.
>> Yeah.
>> It's really pretty.
>> It's old-fashioned.
>> I think overall, it's
interesting in this film that
everything is taking
place at Christmas.
This is a religious holiday.
But we almost get the
impression from the cult side
that it's the
inversion of Christmas.
Just like they reversed
the musical mass chant,
Christmas itself
has been inverted
as a kind of dark version
of Christmas almost.
>> Alice, what do you
think we should do?
>> What do I think we should do?
>> Look, Mommy.
>> Hey.
[SIGH]
What do I think?
I-- I don't know.
>> So many big events happen
on occult calendar days,
or on Lammas, or Walpurgisnacht
or something like that.
>> They do, and Kubrick
is totally aware of this.
I pointed out to
you that Kubrick
died on March 9,
1999, which is exactly
666 days from January 1, 2001,
which is the year of his most
famous movie.
And so even his death has these
weird occult aspects to it.
And you have to wonder if
that wasn't an accident,
either, you know.
>> Well, is there a connection
between a monolith in the film
"2001" and in 2001, two
giant monoliths fall on 9/11.
>> Exactly, one of the buildings
in the World Trade Center was
called the Millennium hotel,
and it was christened in 2001,
the year of the--
and it was shaped just
like the black monolith.
>> Right, and the reason we
would say that in reference
to "Eyes Wide Shut" is that
this is a film about ritual.
It's about a occult
ritual, dates, calendars.
And so in this worldview,
in this perspective,
you can see how he would perhaps
view these kinds of big ritual
actions in that way, twilight
language, so to speak.
>> Yeah, and we now-- a
few years ago it came out--
pictures from a
Rothschild party.
>> 1972 Rothschild ball, right?
>> 1927, which was exactly
the same kind of masks
and everything, and I would
point out that the orgy takes
place in a house owned by
the Rothschilds in real life.
So there are all
these allusions that
are going on between
the occult and reality.
I would point out
something important here.
My first essay on "2001"
being an occult film
came out in April of 1999.
And I was chastised by
many Kubrick people,
saying that Kubrick wasn't
interested in the occult.
It was a science fiction film.
You've taken this way too far.
And then, of course,
on July 20, 1999,
exactly 30 years
after the landing
of the Apollo moon Lander for
Apollo 11, "Eyes Wide Shut"
came out, at Kubrick's
insistence by the way.
And everybody had
to change their mind
because here it
was clear that he
was talking about the occult.
There's one other
aspect of this film
I want to touch on
before we go here,
and that hasn't been
seen very much before.
And it's more of a personal
story from Stanley.
Many people don't realize,
but years before this movie
was made and his death,
his daughter, Vivian,
had left the family and
moved to Los Angeles
to join Scientology cult.
>> Really?
>> Yes, and Kubrick
was very upset by this,
especially when Vivian
did not come home for her
sister's funeral,
which was shocking.
And she did not come home for
Stanley's funeral, either,
I might add.
And Kubrick was
very upset by this
and wrote a 40-page letter
to her, which remains
unpublished to this day.
But those who have read it
said it's a heartbreaking,
you know, literary piece
of him begging his daughter
to come back, because she
was the light of his life.
>> My takeaway from this film
is that there are power players
that most people can't
see and can't conceive of.
And so because
they can't conceive
of there being rich and powerful
cults that engage in sex magic
or have this kind of a magical
worldview, ceremonial magic
and whatnot, they don't
believe that that exists.
And then in this story as
well as other stories like it,
you have the no-nothing
person confronted with this.
It melts their mind
basically, and then they
don't know how to interpret
the world at all after that.
It's a completely
jarring experience.
Their whole worldview
is shattered.
And I think that the name
of the film gives it away.
Kubrick is saying
to the audience,
this is how the
world really works.
Your eyes are wide shut.
I can show it to you, and
you still won't believe it.
>> Yeah, I think
that's a good takeaway.
My takeaway is a little
bit different, but close.
I think actually some of the
ideas that we've expressed
in this show is in reverse.
What's happening here at
the beginning of the show
is Tom is an individual.
Tom is a self-realized doctor.
He's at the top of his game.
And he uses money to get what
he wants because he thinks
that's how the world works.
But by the end of the show,
he is no longer self-realized.
He has just been destroyed.
His personality
has been flatlined.
And I think that Kubrick loves
to do these juicy reversals.
And I think he's doing the
exact opposite of the hero's
journey in this, and
it's the exact opposite.
The hero is going to lose.
>> The hero fail.
>> The hero fail, exactly.
>> OK, interesting.
>> Yeah.
>> Join us next time
on "Hollywood Decoded."
I'm Jay Dyer.
>> And I'm Jay Weidner.
Thanks for watching.
[THEME MUSIC]